Hello All,

TLDR:
There was a change made to chai that breaks .required() imports when you try to use them.
This change was chai is ESM, ES Modules, only now and CJS, comman javascript requires() do not work on them.
So, Here is a working example of using mocha 10.8.2 and chai 5.1.2 the latest version of each module.
https://github.com/Zythan/mochachai.git

Story Time::

While going through the course: 
 Create a Back-End App with JavaScript
Module:
 Developing JavaScript Apps Locally
Section 
 Reading Test with Mocha and Chai

Since this was just a short description of testing, I decided to look further into it as I haven't really done any unit test in js before.
Little did I know what a huge can of worms I was opening.

I did the basic look up example/tutorial and run them and would get ESM module Errors from Chai

A little research and the reason this was happening was almost all the examples you can find are using chai 4.?.?
In version 5.?.? they went to ESM only.
This means the model.export and required() imports would no longer work with chai.
You have to use ESM import {} from './filenamehere' and export {someRefrence} or export const function{}

That was easy enough right? You just refactor them...well no
You also had to add to your package.json "type": "module",
Again simple enough right? 
Again no for the life of me I couldn't get it to work correctly.
Either modules not found or file not found or the sky is blue errors

So I made one of my own from scratch ...it didn't work either
At this point it was getting late and I shut down for the night.

Next day I start back in on the course and the next code project they have you download has a test folder.
Oh boy here we go again I am thinking.

So bitting the code binder, I start fresh again after learning alot more about npm module imports and other things.
First, I go well lets do an old one just using old chai 4.1.1 as the example I was looking at is using.
Can be found by looking in the package.json to see what dependencies it uses.
It work! Woot! welll sort of.
It ran but it threw out half a dozen or more warnings about security issues with 4.1.1.
Sigh,
Ok back to scratch again, have to get 5.?.? working
I simplified main.js to just 2 variables.
Exported them directly (kiss)
export let a = 4
export let b = 2

Built the test.main.js with a the import of a and b and a console.log(a,b)
import {a,b} from '../src/main.js'

console.log(a,b)

This worked so added 
describe('My Test Suite', () => {
  it('Should test a variable', () => {    
    expect(a).to.be.equal(10);
  });  
});

This throws the module can't be found use ESM modules error or change file name...
Ok more digging into post on chai failing with esm and I find need to add "type":"module" to package.json
I had tried this the day before but it didn't work but with simplified code I figured I would try it again.
Added the line to package.json and it didn't work again.
This time I had, "except" could not be found error.
I was like wth so I checked my module install (npm list) 
Yep the were there.
hmmm...
Was looking around and found post saying you are dumb you forgot to import chai into test.main.js
Sigh again
So I did import { expect } from 'chai' into test.main.js 
And it worked! 
Whew so many hours gone for chasing down this one.
I learned a ton on npm commands modules ESM and the different ways to import export items in javascript.
So I thought I would share in case someone else ran/runs into this problem with examples being out of date on js mocha/chai testing




